---
layout: post
title: >
    emudrama and interpersonal relationships: a retrospective
img: tragedy.jpg
---

[ this is work in progress]

# Prelamble
This is a retrospective. Feel free to report inaccuracies to me, and i'll fix them up. Que sera, sera, and i wish everyone involved all the best with their private lives and their public projects.

# Amending a timeline
[ Timeline / contents are WIP here, from my fragile and weak memory. Will cross check for final version of post. ]

April 1st, 2007 nullDC is released and I acquire emudev.org. 2008 is the Financial Crisis. 2010 it is felt in Greece; I open source nullDC. 2013 I meet some random Swiss people in a coworking space. 2014, I am invited by said people to join them in Zurich. In 2015 Capital Controls are imposed in Greece and my family and loved ones suffer; meanwhile I am invited at NVIDIA. 2016i-sh libretro drama starts, with some emails reaching my manager trying to defame me and others in the emulator community; libretro starts shipping a fork of reicast, but without changing the name. Autumn 2017 has some very traumatising events in my private life that reverberated over several years - up to quite recently -, leading to me having explosive anger and little patience. 2018/2019 the "so called" reicast of libretro further drifts away with signifant contributions from Flyinghead; I try to reconcile to a single project and largely fail, though some merges make it to mainline (eg, [reicast!1540](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/pull/1540)). 2019 something triggers me, and I completely lose it with libretro leadership, requiring them to change the name of their fork, threatening with suing over trademark/namemark violation, for which I applied to get, but got rejected eventually. Thankfully, the fork was renamed and peace was found. I NEVER threated to sue over something else. Just to correct internet rumors here.

## Reicast
Throughput the past years i have made my intentions clear to more LIBERALY license reicast, not to close source it, and to explore some freemium model with eg, built in cheat code support or HLE bios add ons to finance the running costs of the project I have been covering since pre-nullDC times. All of this has been publicly discussed and documented for decades [reicast!407](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/issues/407) [reicast!455](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/issues/455) [reciast!1928](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/issues/1928). I exercise my CLA rights per [reicast!455](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/issues/455) and [reicast!1788](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/pull/1788). 2021 Dec 22nd reicast is EOL'd as per [reicast#95b673698863b6a8a4e1852ec018855cca43f9c7](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator/commit/95b673698863b6a8a4e1852ec018855cca43f9c7) as I've enough blame and abuse, been called names, and zero gratitude for open sourcing nullDC, which i had zero obligation to do. A sizable chunk of reicast (~80%) is still nullDC/e code, and while I don't know, I bet that a large chunk remains in flycast or other forks, especially at core emulation parts. eg, Who would that that TA FIFO handling, that code is such a blazing fast meta-mess.

Note, that neither dc4ever, nor nullDC and also not Reicast have started as community efforts, and instead were started/led by me (dc4ever) with ZeZu throwing his support behind nullDC(/e) as a joint project, after with involvement with Icarus. I GPL'd nullDC because I didn't want the code to go to waste when that proejct went EOL, without actually asking him that much (sorry Z, maybe I shouldn't have). Between me and ZeZu - taking aside contributions from 2017 and onwards, especially technical ones from Fylinghead - we have written the bulk of the core and supporting emulation code. I've written several parts of the emulator twice or thrice.

Here's some historical archives for evidence: [dc4ever](https://github.com/skmp/dc4ever) [nullDC-svn](https://github.com/skmp/nullDC-svn) [nullDC/e](https://github.com/skmp/nullDCe) [nullDC](https://github.com/skmp/nullDC) and finally [Reicast](https://github.com/skmp/reicast-emulator). If someone needs to freeload on other people's dreamcast emulation work, I don't think that is me. So let's please cut the bs and stop false naratives.

### A personal apology to flyinghead
Shots have been fired both ways, i'm sorry for saying hurtful things when angry. I was beside myself with the situation at hand, and you got caught in the libretro crossfire and spillover from my private affairs. My sincere aplogies, and gratitude for building on top of Reicast's legacy.

### Aftermath
[Flyinghead](https://github.com/flyinghead/flycast) has succeeded where I didn't, in consolidating support and adding features; albeit with differing technical priorities. They are a capable leader.

I have [devcast](https://gitlab.com/skmp/devcast) where I do R&D work; eg for [refsw](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/1W9U1dZSEQw) and the GTA ports to dreamcast [dca3](https://gitlab.com/skmp/dca3-game).

## FEX-Emu
[ rewrite this to include more details, maybe similar tone to above]

There was a disagreement in fex-emu, with several technical and non-technical angles.

Ryan & Scott have chosen a new home page, fex-emu.com

I (skmp) will continue to slowly work on hex-emu, on a non-sponsored, free time basis, for now.

### Differing Technical Priorities between the projects
As a emudev old-timer, over the years I've learned to work from a "guarantees to guest" viewpoint, with well defined specs and boundaries on what is emulated, to what extent, and what is not.

My experience from both open source and commercial emulators I've worked on has lead me to a strong preference for that position, over ad-hoc, auto-magical, wishful, leaky abstractions that constantly need to be re-defined through tedious debugging.

While fex has similar priorities in some cases, in other, critical ones, it does not.

The loose definition of the IR ops, the often inaccurate and partial implementation of the Linux kernel ABI, the casually treated leaky rootfs 'overlay' design, and the complete disregard for several dead ends in the thunks direction were some sources of unresolved disagreement and conflict.

To be fair, the scope of a x86/64 Linux user-mode emulator is vast, and temporary solutions can be stopgap way of advancing development.

I don't agree with the view of that being the end goal, though.

As a developer, I prefer code-bases that are consistent, dense and generative over confusingly named, organically-grown spaghetti style of code.

Emulators can be very hard to design cleanly, as typical OOP patterns don't map well, and hard real-time performance is often a key priority.

Unfortunately, the way fex-emu source code was (is?) organized could quite objectively be considered subpar and confusing. I've learned myself from past projects, primarily reicast, that if technical dept is systematically ignored it only gets worse.

To list a few problematic aspects of the code-base, af or September 2022.

- Confusingly named files that don't actually match the class names contained within.
- Source and accompanying Header files having different names.
- Several classes and subclasses having the same name, on same named files, in different namespaces / folders.
- Confusing, non-obvious folder structure.
- Confusing, non-obvious type names.
- A widespread violation of DRY and SRP principles, entangling highly unrelated parts of the code-base together. This is most obvious in the configuration and guest syscalls/os systems.
- Widespread inline forward declarations in header files, which has led to several forward declarations of types that don't even exist any more.
- Over complicated, over abstracted code-base for the scale of the project. Eg, the C interface of the C++ 'context' class.
- A ton of unused, legacy code, that still defines structural aspects of the project.
- Several instances of unfactored, duplicated code which has inconsistently diverged over time.
- Summarizing, working in the code-base often felt like working on a highly-legacy project, before even having a stable release.

All projects have growing pains, even more so highly complicated ones. And we all write bad code while focused on other aspects. Without a focus on keeping the source code in a good shape, long term, working with it can be very frustrating.

In hex-emu I'm trying to work towards refactoring, cleaning up, and providing stronger guarantees.

Preferring consistency and predictability over performance and wishful abstractions, while planning for configuration options that offer trade-offs when performance becomes a priority.

### Interpersonal conflict
[ to fill this in]

### Aftermath

As I had registered fex-emu.org domain myself, and due to how things went down, I decided to keep a notice of the situation here before letting the domain expire in April 2023.

There used to be an iframe of fex-emu.com in fex-emu.org for continuity for a few months. I assume people have updated their bookmarks at this point.

[fex-emu.com homepage](https://fex-emu.com)


Cheers for reading this far,
~ skmp

Πάνω απ' όλα, είμαστε άνθρωποι·

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Ydo71Z5NO0I" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[[ maybe rewrite all this ]]
